# Atomic Parameter Patterns

Moderator: Fabio Lenherr

## Interface Representation Patterns

### Structural Representation Patterns

There are various structural patterns for API representation design. The following key quality attributes are especially siginificant:

1. Interoperability: Ensuring the API can seamlessly work across different platforms and programming languages.
2. Performance: Optimizing factors such as latency, network resource consumption, and message verbosity.
3. Developer Convenience and Experience: Balancing ease of use for both API consumers and providers.
4. Maintainability: Facilitating the ability to evolve API clients and providers independently without disruptions, often by aiming for loose coupling.
5. Security and Data Privacy: Ensuring the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of data in transit and guarding against malicious tampering or impersonation.

Note: Quality attributes can vary depending on whether the API is public or internal.

### Structures for API

- Single structured
- Single atomic
- Multiple structured
- Multiple atomic
- Pagination

### Atomic Parameter

Problem:

Two applications need to communicate over a network, how can these applications guarantee consistent data when (possibly) different technologies are used?

Forces:

- Interoperability -\> Only create custom ones when needed
- Expressiveness: Specify undefined or NULL values explicitly
- Information: Specify ranges in API documentation
- Performance: API should not spam network

Solution:

Use single parameters with a singular scalar value that should be as universal as possible (int over Integer class -\> java). These singular parameters can have limited ranges or might possibly be nullable, however, this should be documented in the API documentation.

Liabilities:

- Might become spammy -\> too many single parameters -\> too many single packets
- Not very expressive
- Additional work needed for strong statically typed languages -\> rust, haskell

Uses:

- Remote API with _low_ amount of information sent or received

### Atomic Parameter List

Problem:

This is an extension of the Atomic Parameter pattern. How do you handle sending multiple data units to the server?

Solution:

- To transmit two or more simple, unstructured information items, define multiple "Atomic Parameters."

Forces:

- Performance: Instead of sending multiple API calls with a single Atomic Parameter, combine then into a list to preserve network capacity and server-side resources. Organize these Atomic Parameters in an ordered list.

Liabilities:

- Serialization and deserialization needed (not always natively supported)
- More work, less expressive than single atomic parameters

Uses:

- Remote API with _high_ amount of information sent or received
- Facebook's Graph API
- Twitter API

## Prüfungsfragen

+ Are Atomic Parameter Lists suitable for all programming languages out of the box? \[no\]
+ Single Atomic Parameter is a suitable pattern for a notification daemon with optional image and response functionality \[no\]